Angela Caso, C-A-S-S-O. C-A-S-S-O. Apparently
it sounds like an Italian name, but it seems like
generations back it was spelled C-A-Z-O. Why and
who changed it, we don't know. But now the whole
family is C-A-S-S-O. And I was born in Revolaredo.
So was my sister. So was my mother. And my father was
born in the state of Coahuila. But they moved. I
really don't know how young he was when they moved
to Nuevo Laredo. And he and my mother were married
when she was only 16 years old. She was just a child,
so to speak. And there were only two of us, my
sister, who is four years older than myself, and I.
Unfortunately, we lost mother when I was just a
very, very young baby. And even though my father
was very young, he did not remarry until after we
were married and after I had children. So, as a
consequence, he moved in, or rather, my
grandmother, my father's mother, was a widow. And
she had to... daughters and married daughters,
and one of his sisters, his oldest sister, was the
one who raised me, who raised us, but I think of her
just like my mother because she actually took care
of me since I was five months old. I don't stop to
realize that I'm sure my grandmother had a lot to do
with it. Was your grandmother living with you too?
Yes, in other words, my father, when mother died,
my father moved in with his family. Or rather, he
made a home for his family. He was always
supporting my widowed grandmother and his two
sisters, young sisters. And so from there on, of
course, there were different moves because my
father was a customs man. He worked for customs. He
had an important position. And we lived for a
while, we lived in what is now, well, in Piedras
Negras. In those days it was called Porfirio Diaz.
Yes, this was before 1910. Yes. But I don't
remember except that my mother, the one who raised
me, married at the time. In Piedras Negras. in what
did she marry in oh wow she married a man from this
side from from the northern side so uh my father in
the meantime had been transferred to piedras
negras and he took his family my grandmother his
two sisters my sister and myself but that night i
started crying and crying and crying i wanted mama
i wanted mom so um he wired because i guess in those
days wiring a sending telegram was Are you
comfortable there, Miss Catherine? Would you
like to sit on one of these rockers? You try.
It's part of the family's old furniture, too. So
anyway, my mother and her husband moved to Piedras
Negras because of me. But that's when the
revolution started, as far as I really don't know.
How old were you when it began? But let's see, I
guess I was three years old. Then we moved back to
Nuevo Laredo. When, I don't know. I really don't
know.
About our moving to this side when we actually
became refugees, I remember some, just vaguely, I
do remember, we lived right in the heart of what is
now Nueva Laredo. Have you been across? Have you
been to Mexico? All right. The first little plaza,
let's see, one, two blocks west. That was where our
home was. And I don't remember, it's funny, but I
just don't remember what the house was like. I know
it was a brick house. I don't remember what
furniture was in it. I don't remember anything
except one thing, this picture. That's the only
thing that I remember of my early, early childhood
days. It's a beautiful picture. It's a beautiful
picture, and it was a picture on her namesake. She
was my father's youngest sister, and she died when
she was 90 years old, so he named me after her. And I
remember that- Angelina. Angela. Angela.
A-N-G-L-A, Angela. And of course, she was Angela
Caso, C-A-S-S-O, the same as my name, my maiden
name. So anyway, that's the only thing that I
remember, that, and I always had a dog. What kind of
dog? Just a plain old dog. Just any dog. As long as it
was a dog. Ordinary dog. Ordinary dog would do for
me. And of course my dolls and things like that. And
my father was a very, very, he was not with the
revolutionists at all. He belonged to the old
party, so to speak. He had been a government
employee with customs under the administration.
I mean, he was still, he was a porfirista all the
time. In fact, they used to say that when they asked
me as a young child, no, I would make this question.
It's very, very childish, but I would always ask
the questions, what are you? Carrancista or
porfirista? No. Maderista or Porfirista?
Because there was Madero and there was Porfirio.
Católica o protestante? Catholic or Protestant?
It seemed like they, as far as I was concerned, they
had to be Catholics. Rich or poor? And we weren't
rich. We were Catholics, yes, but we weren't rich.
But yet I wanted those three qualities. Just like a
child, I guess. So anyway, I never attended school
in Mexico. Do you remember what year your family
moved across the border? Sister says that we moved
in 1912. In 1912. So this would have been after Diaz
was overthrown and Madero had become president.
Yes, but I think that it was The revolution was
between Huerta. And the Carrancistas. And the
Carrancistas. And Huerta, of course, by that time
represented the federal government again. Yes,
yes. So my aunt, the one who raised me, lived on this
side. I remember that many times, I couldn't tell
you how many times, but I do remember that during
the night they would wake us up and we would have to
walk across because there was the alarm that the
Revolucionistas were coming. So half asleep and
just they practically dragged us. Of course as I
say it was right in town and we didn't have a car and
very few people did. So we would cross the bridge
and get to Mother's. She lived where Crestor is now
located, which is in the very heart of town. And of
course, we would come and stay with her. Then it
would quiet down. My father would say, all right,
everything is all right. It was just a false alarm,
so we would get back across. How many times we did
that, I don't know. But when the real thing
happened, we had already crossed. My
grandmother. one of my aunts, my sister, and
myself. My father didn't come with us because he
joined the federal government. And he was... He
joined the military? Well, in other words, I guess
he wanted to help. And he had been sent the
paycheck, the payroll, for all of the custom men.
And he felt like he had to find them and pay each one
what was due to him. And so we came, and I do remember
that my grandmother used to cry quite often
because she hadn't heard from Daddy, of course. I
wasn't aware of the fact that Daddy was in danger.
Then there's another very,
how shall I put it, very much alive thing
in my mind. And that was when they burned Nuevo
Laredes. They set fire to Nuevo Laredes. And we
could see the flames and the smoke and everything.
And my grandmother was crying. She says, there
goes my home. And of course, I mean, I guess they say
that my grandmother was just thinking that it was
her home. It did go down in fire. I mean, it was
destroyed. As most of the city was. It was not a big
city, but anyway, everything. And the only thing,
I don't believe that we brought any clothes with
us. I really don't believe we did. The only thing
that my grandmother made sure that was crossed at
the very first time was this picture. She brought
it and left it here for safekeeping. So you had left
and come over here, but you hadn't brought that
much with you. Perhaps they were planning to go
back? Yes, I'm sure that my father was very
optimistic. He couldn't believe that the
government would be...
output by the revolution. I don't think anyone
ever believed it was going to last so long. He
didn't believe, he didn't want to accept the fact
that unfortunately that was what was happening.
Unfortunately for them, but fortunately for many
others. So I don't know how many hours or how many
what the fire lasted. I couldn't tell you because
I'm sure that it was extinguished to the best of
their abilities. whichever way they were able to
do it. But I remember that after it was all over,
crossing the bridge was no problem. It was just
like going down the street. There was no
immigration department to ask you where you were
born. There was no registration at all on either
side? Nothing whatsoever. And my grandmother
went across the river and she came back and she said
that she had, as a young, Her family was a family of
means.
My great-grandfather was a wealthy man, and his
children naturally, in those days, they thought
that the boys were the ones who were supposed to
keep most everything, not the girls. But she did
have some things like silver pieces. She didn't
bring any of them. And they were all lost in the
family? They were all lost. The only thing she
found was all the silver melted. But of course
there was a lot of
robbery around. I mean, it was in the hands of... In
fact, I don't even know who was responsible. They
even say, my husband, if you would ask my husband,
he would say that it was the same general who was
with the government that set fire to the Nuevo
Laredo rather than have it fall in the hands of
the... Carencistas. Yes. But of course, I mean, it
would be very hard to prove anything like that. Why
would your husband say that? Because he believed
in the revolution. And you say his family is not...
No, they're not refugees. They've been here for a
long time. Well, his family was from the little
town of Guerrero. Yes. And his grandfather...
More or less around that time, I believe, that was
when my husband lost his father. And his mother,
with all her children, moved to Zapata, to a ranch
that my husband's grandfather had. And his family
name is Zapata. Yes. Is he a descendant of the
Antonio Zapata? No, no. Not to my knowledge. I
really don't know. He always makes a joke of it, and
he says that he comes from...
Zapata, the revolutionist Emiliano Zapata.
That's a long way off. He makes a big joke out of it. I
don't believe that he really knows whether, he
says that there was some relation with Antonio
Zapata. Yes. And the problem was because the name
Zapata is not a very common name. And so after that,
we stayed here. And I remember that when my father
came back, of course my grandmother was elated
over the fact that her son was back home. But there
was no working here. I mean, we were left
absolutely penniless. And we couldn't stay with
mother because her home was big. An average size
home for a couple, but not for four more people.
Let's say four more people. Because it was my
father, my grandmother, and five. My aunt, my
sister, and myself. So we moved. I can't even
remember where. Houses were very, very hard to
find. At first we lived in a small, small place that
I can't even tell you. The only thing that I
remember is that my father said, you girls cannot
go out and play with anyone here in this
neighborhood. Because I guess he felt like they
were not our class, our kind. But we grabbed
whatever we could. And surviving was actually the
main thing. And many other people, like the
Longorias, came, you know, . I've heard the name.
All right. They came and moved in with my aunt, who
lives at a corner from us. Because they, too,
didn't have a house in which they were to move to.
Well, Loretta was really full of refugees at that
time. Yes, that was the trouble. See, so you
grabbed whatever you could. Then we moved to
another house, and it was half of the house. We
lived in half of the house, the other half of the
house. a friend of my daddy's read, he and his wife.
And it was like that for several years until we were
able to, daddy was able to get back on his own two
feet and we started school and that's about it.
Well what kind of work did your father eventually
find? Well at first he did anything. I really don't
know what he did, but he would do just anything. But
finally, that's when custom brokers started. My
husband is a custom broker, a forwarding agent.
That's what they're called now. But we used to call
them custom brokers, agente aduanal. And my
father worked with an agente aduanal. He ran the
office for Mr. Gonzalez. And, of course, it was in
his line of work because he had always been a custom
man. Had he spoken English before the Revolution?
No, he didn't speak a word of English. Not a word. He
never knew any English. He never did learn. I never
heard a word of English in my home. Never. Not a
word.
So that made it even more difficult for him on this
side. Of course, Spanish here was the main
language.
you would go to the stores and everybody knew what
you were talking about so it wasn't as much of a
handicap as it would have been someplace else now
knowing English or vice versa knowing Spanish is a
must we live in a bilingual absolutely bilingual
Laredo is almost completely on both sides
bilingual community it is a bilingual community
really And I don't remember of any, absolutely, I
absolutely don't remember of any...
When I started school, I don't remember that I
was...
The fact that I came from Mexico or that I was
Mexican had anything to do with it. Of course, most
of my classmates were Mexican, of Mexican
descent, maybe Americans, because we keep on
thinking of Mexicans when we are really American.
I am an American in that I became an American
citizen. My husband still is a Mexican citizen. He
is. Yes. And when my grandmother passed away, She
was buried in Mexico. When my father passed away,
he was buried in Mexico. My uncle passed away and
his wife passed away. They were buried in Mexico.
So they retained very strong emotional ties. They
were very, very strongly tied to. And we still are.
We are. Why did your father not return to Mexico
after the revolution? Because he was not allowed
to go. Well, things quieted down. Yes, they
quieted down. But he was absolutely against
everything that the revolutionists stood for.
And they, naturally, they would have In the first
place, he didn't want to go as long as it was in the
hand of the new party. And in the second place,
there was a danger of his being imprisoned. He was
still identified with the idea. Yes. He was still
identified, and not only that, he was still
helping. Yeah, Felix Diaz was still in Mexico, or
off and on, up until 1919 or later, wasn't he? I
believe he was. There was always the possibility
of Diaz countering. Well, Felix was the nephew.
Yes, those were my father's dreams. And I remember
that he used to cry, literally cry. You could see
his tears rolling down his cheeks when he stood and
looked across. into his country, or he would hear
the bugles, because Laredo was a very quiet town.
So if the soldiers were, if for any reason you could
hear the bugles, he would cry. He longed to be in
Mexico. I don't remember, I don't know what year it
was that he went back. But we never returned. We
stayed here. Because there was actually, there
wasn't anything for him to do in Mexico. What year
did he die? Daddy died in 1952. In 1952. The first
year that I know, I remember in September of 1952.
So I remember that our oldest son had been, that was
his first year in college when Daddy died. He had
just gone off to Missouri to Kemper Military
School in Missouri when Daddy died. and but he
always and at the time by then he was living in
mexico oh he did go back i remember i told you that he
remarried yes he remarried now when was this yeah
this is after you were grown yes well uh my little
brother would be i
think that daddy must have remarried in uh
Let me see, 52 and about 43. And was his wife from
here or from Mexico? No, she was from Mexico. From
where in Mexico? From a little small town between
Monterey and Nuevo Laredo. which is called, it's
almost non-existent now. Well, Sabina Sedalgo
has existed. No, yes, it's another little town.
Oh, there's a little ghost, there's a little
almost ghost mining town down there. All right,
that's a lot. Yeah, I know where it is. That's where
she was originally from. And my father, even
though he was, I mean, he was not, he was still
considerably, he was old, but... Not too old not to
be able to bear children. What year was he born?
Daddy? I
have to go back and think. I really don't know.
Maybe.
Maybe. In 1980. 1980. No. Well, how old was he when
he died? I don't remember. No. But it was about
1980. More or less around 1980. Well, then after he
married, the second time he returned to Mexico.
Yes, and he had this child. And he naturally, he
adored him because he was, well, for one thing, We
two were married. My sister and I were married. And
he loved my children very, very dearly. I already
had my two sons. But
my father's name was Gustavo, and they named my
little brother Gustavo also. We called him
Tabito. He was a very, very lovely child, and a
beautiful child too, unfortunately. Daddy
passed away in 52, and unfortunately, Tabito
developed cancer of the lungs and died when he was
18 years old. That's so unusual. It just went like
this, like
fire.
And his mother, is she still alive? Yes, his mother
is still alive. We don't see her very often because
she's not in Abuelaredo most of the time. There are
times when she is. Well, it was a very short-lived
relationship. Not that we were against daddy
remarrying, because I think that it was wonderful
that he didn't give us a stepmother when we were
young. So we realized that he needed a wife. He
needed someone to look after him, even though he
has. But it would have never been the same. But he
didn't live long enough to... to see his little boy
grow up. In fact, my brother, my half-brother was
much younger than my children because I have my
oldest son is 37 and my second son will be 34
tomorrow. My baby is 27. She's a girl. She's
married, too. And my two brothers were already, my
two boys were already born. In fact, my daughter
was born, Tabitha was born in March, and
Mariangela came in November of that same year. And
Daddy would I tell Tavito, these are your nephews.
They are your nephews. You're their uncle. And of
course, it was very hard for my children to
understand that Tavito was their uncle when they
were older than he was. I can see why. Well, when
your father moved back to Mexico, it was to Nuevo
Laredo. Yes. Had he retired then, or did he? No, he
was still working. He worked until the very last.
In fact, he was bookkeeper for... for a big liquor
store, Escamilla. And he worked there until he
died. He died on this side. By the time he went back
to Mexico, how did he feel about the revolution and
everything that had happened? Well, he was
bitter. He was always bitter. But he admitted, I
mean, the fact that they had no chance. that was
past history and they would have to accept it as it
was. And he was friendly with the people, with the
government people and everybody respected him
and there was no
animosity between them. Of course he was one of the
old timers and he had old timer friends who were
living in Nuevo Laredo. And so he actually made a
comeback, so to speak. Unfortunately, my
grandmother sold her property. She says, we'll
never move back to Mexico. I might as well sell it.
And my father was very much against it, but it was
her own home. Just the land, naturally, because
the house was destroyed.
Right now it's very, very valuable, but it was her
desire and there wasn't anything we could do. This
is not infrequent.
There's a very interesting story about from some
towns I studied that were disrupted by Paricutin
volcano. Yes. And they moved and they sold. Yeah.
And one man, he didn't even sell his land. Of
course, volcanic ash had fallen on it. And it
wasn't worth anything then. But it's very good
now. What he did was tear his papers up. He just tore
them up and burned them and said, no more town, no
more land, and left. And they say he still cries
about it. He lives in California now. He sits down.
Crying won't bring it back, though. Not even
selling it. But this is not uncommon, apparently.
It's just a reaction to catastrophe, really. I
guess so. I'll remember that, just in case. But
now, your mother's, or your father's family from
Coahuila, what town were they from? Candela.
Candela. Yes. Were they ranchers or ? Yes, yes, and
ranchers. So I remember that my grandmother used
to say that when they would travel from one, from
Candela to some other place, she had many sisters,
and they would all wear sort of like porcelain that
were made for that purpose with wide strips. And
those were filled with the gold coins. Because I
imagine they feared being attacked.
They raised a lot of sheep and goats. And when my
great grandfather would sail, I guess, I don't
know, I remember that one thing that my
grandmother used to tell us. Her name was Barreda.
B-A-R-R-E-D-A. And she said, she used to tell us
that actually her name was De La Barreda. De La
Barreda. And there were two brothers who were
given Well royalties from Spain, one was his name
was Ramon and the other one was Fructuoso and this
Ramon was my great great grandfather. Did he come
directly from Spain? Yes, directly from Spain and
Fructuoso was lost. They don't know whether the
Indians caught him or what. They never did hear
from him anymore. So the only branch of the La
Barredas was from this Ramon de la Barreda. But
then they dropped the De La and just called
themselves Barreda. It seems like I read
somewhere that a lot of families dropped the De La
during the war for Mexican independence or
shortly afterwards. Well, I imagine it could have
been then that they did it. But there were rich
people. And my grandfather, Picasso, came from a
small town, Ahualewas. Ahualewas is in the state
of Nuevo León. Now how did he, oh wait a minute,
that's your father, how did he meet your mother? My
father, or you're talking about my grandfather,
My grandfather was from Ahualewas. Oh, your
grandfather. How did he meet your grandmother?
Oh, that I don't know. She never told you that? I
wish she would have told me. I wish. She would have
been interested. And the only aunt we had living,
who had a tremendous memory, my daddy's older
sister, older than himself, she remembered, she
knew everything, but we never took We never
stopped to ask her those little things that mean so
much in life. In fact, she gave me this set. It was
hers, and she told me, you keep it, you take it. And
so I treasure it most highly, and I treasure that
picture, too. Because that picture, to me, is part
of my childhood. Wherever I went, the first thing
that my grandmother would sit doing was that the
picture was hung in a place where it's very heavy,
where it wouldn't break or fall or something. Did
your aunt also come to the United States, your
father's older sister? Yes. The one I'm talking
about? No, no. She lived in Nuevo Laredo. Her
husband also came from Candela. And they came, I
imagine, during the revolution, they came to
Nuevo Laredo. I really don't know when. And they
only had one daughter, and she still lives. She's
still living, and she has a nice home on Aveo
Avenue, but she lives by herself. And she's a very
strange person. I mean, she's had a hard life in
that she's by herself. Economically, she doesn't
like anything. But she lives a very, very sad life,
and no matter We asked her to come over and spend
some days with us. Oh no, she would never think of
leaving her home. And so as a result, her life is
rather sad. She reads a lot. And she's up to
everything. But her mother had a tremendous
memory, I'm telling you. This is actually your
grandmother's sister you're talking about. No,
I'm talking about my father's sister. Your
father's sister. His oldest sister. I didn't know
any of my grandmother's sisters. None of them.
This is your father's oldest sister. I did know my
grandmother's brother, Ramon. Named after his
father, Ramon de la Valeria.
lived in Monterey, at least his daughters still
live in Monterey. So, and then on my mother's side,
my grandfather also worked, he was a custom man
also, and his name was Barrera.
B-A-R-R-E-R-A. Well, that's very similar. Very
similar, except for the D. So I'm Caso on my
father's side, Barrera on my mother's side. And
then Barrera, my third name, and then Martinez.
Now, after you came here, you went to school. Oh,
yes. How long did you go to school? Well, I
graduated from high school, and then... I started
teaching without, with nothing but a teacher's
certificate that you were able to obtain by taking
a Jillian. I went to summer school in San Marcos and
I took what was required in order to obtain a
teaching certificate. And we took exams. every
single course that we had taken during our 12 years
of school. Everything, just everything. And I got
my certificate, and I felt like I was safe. I came
home with my certificate, ready to teach. A
requirement to teach was you had to be an American
citizen. My father said no.
You are a Mexican, and I want you to remain a
Mexican. But later on, he came in without my
really, I didn't exactly beg him, but I guess I must
have made him realize that it was a shame that I
could help, and yet I was unable to because of his
pride to remain always a Mexican citizen. We lived
here. This was a country that had given us a home.
So when I got my citizenship papers, I started
teaching, as I told you. And I taught for just for 30
years. For 30 years? Just 30 years? Just 30 years.
But in the meantime, of course, I couldn't keep on
teaching with that little old certificate. they
offered extension courses from A&I. And we
started, all of us, I mean all of the young teachers
in those days, we started taking courses because
in the first place, my father wouldn't dream of my
going to school. Away from home. I went to Austin
for six weeks to the University of Texas But daddy
took me and we stayed in what was called Newman
Hole, run by nuns. But father thought that being
run by nuns, we would be in at 8 o'clock and that we
would be supervised by nuns. He didn't realize
that we were free to do whatever we wanted to. Of
course, I mean, I knew better and I knew exactly how
to behave. thanks to, I'm proud to say that he
instilled that in us. Then, later on, I kept on
taking courses here in Laredo. And then, since
Kingsville was not far, I used to take courses by
going on Saturdays, and by attending school
during the summer months. And I stayed in the city
court at home, which was run by the Sisters of
Mercy. So the only way that Daddy would have
consented to my going off to school for a whole one
or two years would have been if I would have been in a
convict with high walls. Broken glass on top? Yes,
yes, yes. Bless his heart. Well, how many years did
you teach before you got married? About four. Four
years. And what did you teach? I always taught the
elementary grades. My last years, I was head
teacher. Then, instead of being assistant
principal, you were a head teacher. And Mrs.
Smith, I didn't teach in this particular school
across the street. I taught in another one
that's... Oh, well, more or less going towards
Zapata. What's called now Dykes School, but it was
Montrose. And I was head teacher there for several
years. And then I was made, we had a new principal,
Mr. Barrow. And I was made assistant principal.
And then Mr. Barrow passed away and I was made
principal. So I was a principal for Montrose
School for several years. And I retired when I was
not Not old, I mean, not old enough to get all the
benefits. But I thought, well, I've helped my
husband enough, and I want to be home and enjoy
life. And they used to say, but look, now that
you're a principal, you're going to retire. Yes, I
made up my mind. I'm going to retire, and that's it.
Would you believe that my first retirement check
was $79?
I'm still getting it because they're different.
You can choose one, two, or three, and I can't
remember what number. I think one, you get the
whole bulk. Number two is something else. I chose
the third,
whatever you call it. And it has been raised. Now I
get $129.
If you'd taught until you were 65 or something.
Until I was 60. If I would have taught until I was 60,
I would have made a much, much, much higher salary.
I mean, I would have received a much higher
retirement check. But I don't regret it. I really
don't. Because in the first place, my husband
doesn't need it. And I don't feel like I have
accomplished more by being home. than by
teaching. I enjoyed my years of teaching. I really
did. And I'm proud to say that my children still
remember me.
Children's mothers still remember me, the
teachers that were with me when I was a principal.
Whenever they see me, they say, we'll never have
another principal like you, and things like that,
which do make you feel proud of the fact that you
retired before you got too cranky. Well, did you
stop teaching at all when you were having your
children? Except,
let me see. When Renato Jr. was born, I didn't teach
the first semester because he was born in
November. This was your oldest son. My oldest son.
Then when Javier was born, I taught all the year,
the whole year. And then when my baby was born, my
young one was born, I had two miscarriages during
that time. And so the doctor and my husband said,
no, you're not going to teach. But I felt like I
wanted to teach because I had put so many years that
I wanted to get the benefits that were due to me.
That's the reason I taught. I've always put it this
way. At first, I taught because I had to and because
I liked it. First because I liked it and then
because I had to. Then I taught because my husband
needed, I wanted to help him so that we would really
be able to get to where we are now. But the last years
that I taught, I taught because I considered that I
should. I was entitled to a little benefit for all
the years that I had put into the profession. And my
husband used to say every time, he said, please,
honey, I don't want you to come home and be tearful
because this little boy didn't have shoes and the
other child needed a haircut and things like that.
I said, now look. If I sell buttons and lace and
thread, in other words, if I go to work as a clerk,
then I promise you that I will never come home
talking about my work. But as long as it's children
that I'm dealing with, I'm going to do it with all my
heart. And I'm going to give them everything that I
can. There's really no other way. Oh, no.
Otherwise, you're not a teacher. No, you have to be
calling. You have to have a calling for it. I
baptized children that were 9 and 10 years old,
because they had never been baptized. I took
children to the barber shop because the mother had
made a promise that if he got well, they would let
his hair grow, which now would be very, very
popular. Oh, yes, a promessa. Yes, yes, things
like that. Oh, my, that's interesting. And they
would come to me, the mothers would come to me, and
my husband didn't bring any money. They cut off the
gas and they cut off the water. And I remember a
butcher at ATV one time I went and I helped the
family as I could. And he told me, Ms. Zapata, I want
to ask a favor of you. I don't want you to interfere
with my family. I said, oh, no. Never will I
interfere with your family. But if your family, if
your children are hungry, I am going to interfere.
And nobody in this world is going to keep me from
doing it. Neither you nor I.